Add What is a Glossary? explanation (#199)
canonical/open-documentation-academy: website/docs/explanation/glossary_what.md

# What is a glossary?

A *glossary* gives the meanings of *terms* in a work or domain.
It is presented as a list of terms in alphabetic order, each with a *gloss* that explains the term.

Each explanation gives the reader enough understanding to become familiar, and perhaps even comfortable, with the term.

Simplicity is prized. A glossary entry should aim to make the reader one step more comfortable with the term.

## Structure

### Definition

> A definition is a statement of fact that conveys the meaning of a term. 

Author: A gloss is more than a definition since it can include all kinds of extra features (See also, etc.).

Second, I was hiding a question about terms with multiple meanings. Is the gloss everything after the entry, or is a gloss what is written about an individual numbered sense? I'm inclined to define gloss as the smaller of the two, so that each numbered sense has its own gloss.

> A definition is a statement of fact that conveys the meaning of a term. 

Reviewer: In that case, should we redefine the header "Structure" as "Structure of the gloss" or similar?

> A definition is a statement of fact that conveys the meaning of a term. 

Author: How about ... (putting the content here till my git fix is in) ...

Structure of a gloss

This section describes a gloss that explains a single sense of a term.

If a term has multiple senses, each sense has its own gloss. In that case, the glosses under the term are numbered. The order of the glosses should be instructive, with the most basic or common senses presented first.

```

### Abbreviation

If the term is an abbreviation, the gloss starts with its expansion. The abbreviation is explained briefly after its expansion.

```{glossary}
DNS
 **Domain Name System**. A system that translates human-readable domain names (canonical.com) to their IP addresses (185.125.190.20).
```

In a conversational style, the definition has more of the structure and tone of a spoken sentence.
For example, the definition may begin by repeating the term being defined.

```{glossary}
FC
 **Fiber Channel** is a storage networking protocol used for low-latency communication between a storage device and a node
 in a Storage Area Network (SAN).
```

In this definition of FC, the abbreviation SAN is preceded by its expansion as is customary in running text.
This is a good way to handle abbreviations that may be unfamiliar or have not yet been formally defined.

### Cross-references

Cross-references help readers navigate among related terms.

If the gloss for a term discusses a second term, the second term should be linked.

<!-- {term}`DNS` replaced by *DNS* -->
<!-- other terms: LDAP, SSL, TLS, DTLS -->

```{glossary}
DDNS
 **Domain Name System**.

>  A service that automatically updates :term:`DNS` records when the underlying IP address changes (aka, dynamic IP).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 A service that automatically updates {term}`DNS` records when the underlying IP address changes (aka, dynamic IP).
```

Reviewer: I think this might be why the link isn't rendering - using colons to define roles is a feature of rST, but the file is a markdown file so it's not being recognised. In MyST we use the squiggly brackets (whatever they're called).

```

When a concept that provides depth or broader context is used in a gloss, it can be linked using "See".

```{glossary}
DIT

>  **Directory Information Tree**. In directory services (See :term:`LDAP`), a hierarchical tree-like structure used to organize and store information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 **Directory Information Tree**. In directory services (See {term}`LDAP`), a hierarchical tree-like structure used to organize and store information.
```

```

> A collection of related topics can be provided at the end of the gloss.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A collection of related topics can be provided at the end of the gloss. These could link elsewhere in the documentation, or to external resources.
```

```{glossary}
GnuTLS
 **GNU’s Not Unix Transport Layer Security**.

>  A GNU software package that secures data in transit by implementing the :term:`SSL`, :term:`TLS`, and :term:`DTLS` protocols.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 A GNU software package that secures data in transit by implementing the {term}`SSL`, {term}`TLS`, and {term}`DTLS` protocols.
```

 Related topic(s): [GnuTLS (Ubuntu Server documentation)](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/server/explanation/crypto/gnutls/#), [GnuTLS (official site)](https://www.gnutls.org/), Cryptography, Web services, OpenLDAP.

```

## Advanced features

> In this treatment, the features considered basic are those focused on meaning.

Reviewer: This sentence doesn't really add much, since we didn't describe the previous content as basic (and we probably don't need to). I think we can safely remove this sentence without harming the rest of the content :)

> There is a further realm of glossary features that are focused on terminology management. Sometimes the origin of a term, or the pronunciation, or an alternate form, or some other aspect of the term is of great interest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a further realm of more specialized glossary features. Sometimes the origin of a term, or the pronunciation, or an alternate form, or some other aspect of the term is of great interest.
```

Advanced features can be introduced in glossaries by imitating the features of entries in authoritative dictionaries.

## Appendix 1: Mechanics

> This document is written in the following hierarchy of languages (high to low):
> * Markedly Structured Text ([MyST](https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/syntax/typography.html#syntax-glossaries))
> * reStructured Text (rST)
> * Markdown (md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document is written in Markedly Structured Text ([MyST](https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/syntax/typography.html#syntax-glossaries)).

Glossaries can also be produced using [reStructured Text (rST)](https://sublime-and-sphinx-guide.readthedocs.io/en/latest/glossary.html).
```

> A reference to a term is coded as follows: ::

Reviewer: This is a common way to present code blocks in rST but doesn't work for markdown unfortunately!

> A reference to a term is coded as follows: ::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A reference to a term is coded as follows:
```

>   :term:`referenced_term`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`{term}`referenced_term``
```

Reviewer: I'm not sure if this will render as you intended, but have a look at if not I'll tweak it again

> A complex glossary entry is coded as follows: ::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A complex glossary entry is coded as follows:
```

>   ```{glossary}

Reviewer: We probably want to also encode this example in a code block too - I suggest using the standard markdown wrappings (the triple backticks at the start and end). I can't create a note suggestion for that because GH doesn't render them properly.

Author: To get the triple backticks to show up, I needed to wrap them in a different code block mechanism, so I used 4-space indentation. That's the approach in the file attached to this recent comment on this PR ... https://github.com/canonical/open-documentation-academy/pull/199#issuecomment-2807924437

  GnuTLS_example
   **GNU’s Not Unix Transport Layer Security**.

>    A GNU software package that secures data in transit by implementing the :term:`SSL`, :term:`TLS`, and :term:`DTLS` protocols.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   A GNU software package that secures data in transit by implementing the {term}`SSL`, {term}`TLS`, and {term}`DTLS` protocols.
```

   Related topic(s): [GnuTLS (Ubuntu Server documentation)](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/server/explanation/crypto/gnutls/#), [GnuTLS (official site)](https://www.gnutls.org/), Cryptography, Web services, OpenLDAP.

  ```

## Appendix 2: Locally-defined terms

These terms are referenced within the topic to illustrate cross-references.

```{glossary}
datagram
 In networking, a self-contained, independent packet sent over a network.
 A datagram can be routed from source to destination without relying on earlier or subsequent transfers.

DTLS

>  **Datagram Transport Layer Security**. A protocol that provides security for :term:`datagram`-based communication, such as UDP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 **Datagram Transport Layer Security**. A protocol that provides security for {term}`datagram`-based communication, such as UDP.
```

# What is a glossary?

## Purpose

This topic will provide background information on glossaries:
* What they are for
* How they are structured
* What advanced features are available

> ## What is a glossary?

Author: Yes, some of this scaffolding is more for the author than the reader. I do like purpose statements, but as the doc matures, perhaps the purpose just shines through.

> ## What is a glossary?

Reviewer: I think it already does, but that's just me :D

A *glossary* gives the meanings of *terms* in a work or domain.
It is presented as a list of terms in alphabetic order, each with a *gloss* that explains the term.

Each explanation gives the reader enough understanding to become familiar, and perhaps even comfortable, with the term.

> Simplicity is prized. As a rule of thumb, a glossary entry should make the reader one step more comfortable with the term.

Author: Done.

## Structural features

### Simple definition

A definition is a statement of fact that conveys the meaning of a term. 
A definition that consists of a simple phrase or sentence may be all the explanation that is needed.

> **core** <br />

Reviewer: For all these examples of glossary features, I'd recommend creating a mini glossary environment for each of them so they render on the page as they would in a full glossary. The syntax should be something like this for MyST:
```
:::{glossary}
Term goes here
: Term definition/gloss goes here
:::
```
(see [the MyST docs](https://mystmd.org/guide/glossaries-and-terms) for a full description)

Author: That's really nifty!
If you'll pardon the rudimentary question ... does the Sphinx parser recognize the various markdown paradigms as it encounters them, or does it need additional cues? Before you said this, I was implicitly assuming File extension == > markup language.

Author: I'm noticing that MyST needs to be installed. Would that be added to the "Set up Sphinx" topic, or built into Makefile?

Reviewer: I've just checked the conf file and it looks like MyST should just work automatically - myst parser is included as part of the canonical sphinx extension (which is enabled). Have you tried running a clean build? Sometimes it doesn't just enable an extension and you have to rebuild the whole thing from scratch. (`make clean` and then `make install` should see everything set up correctly, then `make run` should work).

If running a clean build doesn't work, let me know and I'll do some more digging.

Author: Alas, a clean build does not suffice. I restored conf.py and ran make clean; make install; make run. The local preview of my latest revision of the glossary_what.md file shows

    :term:`NFS`

rather than processing the term reference.

I put some notes in my previous comment about difficulties installing MyST on ARM.

Reviewer: I think I found the source of the problems! I've added suggestions for all the instances I could find (I may have missed one or two though)

Author: Thank you, Sally! I was a bit confused about which markdown languages work where. I now think that MyST works on top of MD (in .md files) but RST is separate (in .rst files).

The working memory of a computer.

> When a formal style is used, the item being defined is omitted from the beginning of the explanation.

Reviewer: I didn't really understand this - I think having a counter-example of an informal style (for the same term) would help to illustrate the point.

Author: There's a discussion of conversational style before the term FC, so I moved the commentary on informality down to there.

### Abbreviation

If the term is an abbreviation, the gloss starts with its expansion. The abbreviation is explained briefly after its expansion.

**DNS** <br />
**Domain Name System**. A system that translates human-readable domain names (canonical.com) to their IP addresses (185.125.190.20).

> ### Abbreviation (conversational)

Reviewer: Could we remove this heading? It feels a bit unneeded to split this up. I think the two sections together read much better as a single discussion.

Author: Done.

A more conversational style is sometimes used, especially when the expansion of an abbreviation can be read as the subject of the gloss.

**FC** <br />
Fiber Channel (FC) is a storage networking protocol used for low-latency communication between a storage device and a node
in a Storage Area Network (SAN).

In this definition of FC, expansions are followed by abbreviations as is customary in running text.
This is a good way to handle abbreviations such as FC and SAN that are comparatively specialized.

### Cross-references

Cross-references help readers navigate among related terms.

> #### A casual mention of another term

Reviewer: I would also suggest removing these three sub-headers, for the same reason as above. It feels like a more complete discussion of a single topic than three separate ones :)

Author: Done.

If the gloss for a term discusses a second term, the second term should be linked.

<!-- {term}`DNS` replaced by *DNS* -->
<!-- other terms: LDAP, SSL, TLS, DTLS -->

**DDNS** <br />

> **Dynamic Domain Name System**. A service that automatically updates (term-ref) *DNS* records when the underlying IP address changes (aka, dynamic IP).

Reviewer: This is where I think using mini-glossaries for these examples would really shine - then you can cross-reference between them as if they really were glossary entries :)

Author: I see how mini-glossaries can be helpful. I created some along the way, and then pooled a few glossary entries at the bottom in a section titled "Appendix 2". Those are the terms that are referenced but are not themselves needed as examples.

Author: I also created "Appendix 1" for code examples. Instructionally, I think it's clearer to have them collected. As how-to material, it might need to be split out, but that depends on how orthodox we're being about factoring instructional information about glossaries.
